# Basic Simulation of Short Gamma-Ray Burst Detection Rates

## Overview


This is a toolkit which comprises python scripts designed for simulating the detections of sGRBs. 
The scripts are using methods described in "Revisiting Coincidence Rate Between Gravitational Wave Detection and Short Gamma-Ray Burst for the Advanced and Third Generation" by Regimbau et al. 

This was written to addresses the following:

- Streamlines the process of simulating the detection rates of Short Gamma Ray Bursts.
- consolidates the sGRB simulation work carried out by the authors into a single toolkit.
- Simplifies the simulation of sGRB detections.
- Provides a basic statistical and visual analysis of simulated points and  direct comparisons to real data from the SWIFT satellite, providing a benchmark for accuracy and relevance.



## Features

- **Detection Rate Visualization**: Tools for generating detailed graphs that illustrate the detection rates of GW and sGRB under various parameters.
- **Automated Redshift Analysis**: Scripts to calculate and analyze the redshift probabilities for detected events, crucial for understanding the cosmological distance and origins of these phenomena.
- **Rejection Sampling Simulation**: Implementation of the rejection sampling method for realistic simulation of detection events, based on probabilistic models.


- **Data Preparation**: Scripts to prepare SWIFT data points for analysis and comparison to simulated data.
- **Detection Rate Visualization**: Tools for creating graphs that illustrate the detection abilities of the SWIFT observatory. 
- **Automated Redshift Distribution**: The ability to draw Redshift probability distribution given a number of star formation rates as described in "Revisiting Coincidence Rate Between Gravitational Wave Detection and Short Gamma-Ray Burst for the Advanced and Third Generation"
- **Rejection Sampling Simulation**: A basic implementation of a rejection sampling method for the detection of sGRBs based on probabilistic models.
-**Work in Progress MCMC**: A work in progress implementation of a Markov Chain Monte Carlo method for the detection of sGRBs based on probabilistic models using the EMCEE package.



## File Descriptions

This is a breakdown of each of the scripts outlining the functionality and their purpose.

### `swift_data_clean.py`

- **Purpose**: Cleans and prepares SWIFT data for analysis and comparison to simulated data.
- **Key Functions**:
  - Moves the entries with missing values to a separate such that it can be added at a later date.
  - Ensures consistent units for all data points.
  - Outputs a cleaned dataset that will be used for further analysis.
- **Dependencies**: requires grb_table of data collected by the Swift Observatory (https://swift.gsfc.nasa.gov/archive/grb_table), ensure the correct columns are selected.

### `Pz_Redshift.py` and `Pz_Auto.py`

- **Purpose**: Calculates a redshift probability distribution for sGRBs based on a variety of different SFR. `Pz_Redshift.py` offeres a manual way allowing for finer control and 
`Pz_Auto.py` will automatically calculate the redshift probability distribution for all provided SFR at tmin values of $20 \times 10^{-3}, 100 \times 10^{-3}, 1000 \times 10^{-3}, 3000 \times 10^{-3}, 5000 \times 10^{-3}$
- **Key Functions**:
    -Constructs a probability distribution by normalising (in the interval 0–10) the coalescence rate as described by Regimbau et al.
- **Dependencies**: requires the txt file SFR_Rome.txt to generate the redshift probability distribution for the Rome model, this file was provided by K. Siellez


### `Rejection_Method.py`

- **Purpose**: Implements a basic rejection sampling method to simulate sGRBs

- **Key Functions**:
  - Applies a rejection sampling technique to generate a set of simualted sGRBs which are then exported as a txt file for further analysis.
  - Allows the user to specify the number of sGRBs to be simulated, the Pz distribution to be used.
- **Dependencies**: This script requires the desired Pz distribution to be specified in the Pz file as outputted by either `Pz_Redshift.py` or `Pz_Auto.py`

### `Emcee_Method.py`

- **Purpose**: a starting point for a MCMC simulation of sGRBs using the emcee package


### `Detection_rate_graph.py`

- **Purpose**: Generates a graph that illustrates the detection rates of sGRBs and compares them to the SWIFT data points and sensitivity curves.
- **Key Functions**:
  - Creates a graph that compares the simulated population of sGRBs to the SWIFT data points.
  - Allows for detection rate analysis which includes the ability to specify the number of sGRBs above a certain detection threshold.
- **Dependencies**: This scripts requires the output of the `Rejection_Method.py` script and the output of `swift_data_clean.py` to plot the required points.

All of the scripts are designed and implemented to run independently of each other however they do depend on files generated by teh scripts before them. 

## Dependencies

- Python 3.x
- re
- NumPy
- Matplotlib
- SciPy
- AstroPy
- emcee (for MCMC)

## Acknowledgments

This project draws upon the research and findings of T. Regimbau, K. Siellez, D. Meacher, B. Gendre, and M. Boer, whose work has significantly contributed to the field.

## Disclaimer

These scripts are intended for research and educational purposes only.
